---
title: "Doc AI Databases"
themes: ["literature_review"]
subthemes: ["doc_ai"]
tags: ["VLMs", "MLLMs", "Doc AI"]
toc: false
math: true
---

Document AI gathers gathers several tasks, such as Document Classification, Document Information Extraction, Document reconstruction, Document Captioning, Document summarization, and Document Question Answering.

**Image classification** is a fundamental task in computer vision that involves categorizing images into predefined groups based on their content. When applied to documents, this process becomes more specific, focusing on the diverse types of document images, such as charts, diagrams, and other visual formats found in documents. For example, chart image classification entails identifying and categorizing a chart extracted from a document into one of several predefined categories. This task is challenging due to the vast array of chart types documented in the literature, each with unique features and structures. Similarly, diagrams and other document visuals are classified based on their characteristics and the information they represent, enhancing the automation and understanding of document content across various applications.

**Information extraction (IE)** task is a common task in NLP. It is the process of automatically extracting structured information from unstructured or semi-structured sources, such as text documents, web pages, or databases. This involves identifying and extracting specific types of entities (such as names of people, organizations, locations) and their relationships from the text. Applied to documents, this task aims first at identifying relevant elements within the document, such as text blocks, images, charts, or specific visual patterns, and then annotating these identified elements with meaningful labels or metadata that describe their content or function within the document.

**Document reconstruction (Rcst)** is a specialized task that shares similarities with optical character recognition (OCR). Its aim is to reconstruct an image page of a document in a manner that preserves both its physical appearance and informational content. For textual content, this process involves assembling text blocks of the image and converting the image document in a textual format. For VrD, which contain specific layout, this reconstruction task aims converting the image document into structured formats like Markdown or HTML, facilitating clear organization and presentation of the content. This means that the input data are a set of images (screenshots of a scientific paper, of a webapp, of a webpage, …) and the output data are the correspond Markdown / LaTex / HTML code of these screenshots. In the case of graphical documents such as charts, reconstruction extends to extracting and reformatting underlying data into non-image formats, such as tables or Markdown.

**Captioning** is a common task in Computer Vision. It is the process of creating descriptive text for images / charts / diagrams / tables, providing context or summarizing the visual content to make it accessible and understandable.

**Question answering** is a common NLP task where a model must provide a natural language response to a question given a passage. This naturally extends to images and evolves into Visual Question Answering. **Visual Question Answering (VQA)** involves providing accurate answers to questions posed in natural language about the content of images. This discipline intersects computer vision and natural language processing to interpret and respond to specific queries about visual elements. While VQA involves a single question and a single answer per image, **Conversational VQA (Conv VQA)** consists of a series of questions and answers within a single conversation, allowing for multiple interactions about the same image. In VQA, the images can vary widely in format: **Conventional VQA** typically uses realistic or synthetic photos, focusing on questions about object recognition, their attributes, and their spatial relationships within the image. **Scene Text VQA** deals with realistic photos that include textual elements within the scene, such as a restaurant sign. It focuses on recognizing and understanding text associated with objects in the image. **Chart VQA** addresses images of charts, which are visual representations of data designed to communicate information clearly and efficiently, such as bar graphs, line charts, or pie charts. Questions in this category often involve trend recognition, value comparisons, and identifying specific properties of the chart. **Diagram VQA**, also called **Infographic VQA**, involves interpreting diagrammatic images which typically explain processes or relationship. A diagram is a complex graphic made up of a graphic space, various elements, and relationships between these elements. The graphic space can be a standard or distorted metric space, like a solar system diagram, or a space without specific meaning, such as in a food web. The elements of a diagram may include visuals (like drawings of animals and plants), text, diagrammatic elements (such as arrows and grid lines), informational elements (like legends and captions), and decorative features. Relationships in a diagram involve the spatial positioning and interaction of these elements, including connections, alignment, and variations in color and shape. Some elements might be composite graphics themselves, making the structure potentially recursive. The questions may ask about the components and connections depicted in the diagrams. **Document VQA** relates to images of various document types, including business PDFs, web pages, forms, receipts, and invoices. These documents can be synthetic or handwritten and may contain elements like charts, diagrams, or text. VQA tasks with documents are akin to **Machine Reading Comprehension (MRC)** tasks, involving questions about textual content that are answered using text extracted from the document. Unlike MRC, which relies solely on text, document-based VQA incorporates image processing to analyze the visual input alongside the textual queries. 
**Multipage VQA** involves addressing questions that require understanding and integrating information across multiple pages of a document, such as a presentation or report, rather than focusing on a single page per question which is the case for **single-page documents**, mostly used in traditional VQA task. As for **Open-domain VQA**, it involves answering questions based on a broad database of documents, images, tables, texts, and charts, where the model includes a retriever component that identifies the specific document likely to contain the answer before generating a response.



Multipage VrDU datasets have emerged recently, and their numbers are steadily increasing, indicating that the field is moving towards this type of task. It can also be noted that the types of documents in VrDU datasets are highly varied, ranging from traditional PDF documents to charts, tables, web pages, arXiv papers, diagrams, and even application pages, which demonstrates the diversity of the field. It is also worth noting that datasets are increasingly covering tasks that require abstract or numerical reasoning, necessitating higher levels of cognitive processing. Finally, datasets are increasingly focusing on incorporating multiple types of data through various instructions.


{{< doc_ai_databases >}}