---
title: "Visual-Language Models for Document AI (OCR-Free models)"
themes: ["literature_review"]
subthemes: ["doc_ai"]
tags: ["VLMs", "MLLMs", "Doc AI"]
toc: false
math: true
---


With the advent of LLMs, Vision-Language Models tend to incorporate them as decoders of their vision output to handle several vision-language tasks. However, fine-grained vision understanding of an image is almost impossible using an LLM as a decoder due to the long sequence size of vision-rich encodings, the complexity of LLMs increasing quadratically with sequence length, and the context size limit LLMs can handle.

Vision-language models for Document AI (OCR-Free) require fine-grained vision encoding, as a document contains much more precise information (from text, graphs, schemas, etc.) than a natural image.

Therefore, we can classify Visual-Language Models for Document AI into three categories: those using fine-grained vision models but a small language decoder, those using low-grained vision models with an LLM as a decoder, and those using both (a fine-grained vision model and an LLM as a decoder) through various techniques.

We review here the literature about Vision-Language Models for fine-grained images (documents).


## {{< posttitle >}}1. Models using low-grained vision model and a LLM as decoder{{< /posttitle >}}

Classic MLLMs. For the LLM to effectively understand and interact with the visual encoder's data, it is necessary that the representations generated by the encoder are in a format or context that is understandable to the LLM. This means that visual data must be transformed into a representation that makes sense in the linguistic domain. That's why an intermediary (a projection matrix) between the visual encoder and the LLM decoder is added. [What matters when building vision-language models?](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2405.02246) shows some best-practices about this projection matrix. This projection layer helps to semantically align visual representations with textual representations. This means that similar visual concepts are mapped to close semantic spaces in the feature space of the LLM, thus facilitating the understanding and generation of language in relation to visual inputs. 
The computational complexity of LLMs in terms of the input sequence length \( n \) can be expressed as \( O(n^2) \), with the complexity arising from pairwise comparisons between elements in the sequence. This is why models using LLMs as decoder often use a smaller representation visual encoder than the vision-rich models

{{< text_rich >}}

## {{< posttitle >}}2. Models using low-grained vision model and a LLM as decoder but trained on fine-grained image date (documents){{< /posttitle >}}

Models using low-grained vision model and a LLM as decoder, known as MLLMs, are initially trained on natural images to perform tasks such as image-based question answering. However, to adapt them to document-related tasks, where the data is specific and less abundant, these MLLMs are fine-tuned on datasets consisting of document page images. This approach leverages the MLLMs' ability to understand visual content while specializing them to interpret the complexities of documents (notably the understanding of text in the image necessary \cite{ocrinmllm}). This is what mPLUG-DocOwl \cite{llmdoc}, mPLUG-PaperOwl \cite{mplugpaperowl}, UniDoc \cite{unidoc}, and LLaVAR \cite{llavar} do, which adapt (fine-tune) these MLLMs on document instruction datasets, called "document instruct-tuning."

{{< text_rich_doc >}}

## {{< posttitle >}}3. Models using fine-grained vision model and a LLM as decoder{{< /posttitle >}}

- Focusing-aware method: Focusing on the region of interest via fine-grained position-aware prompts, i.e., click points, dragged bounding boxes, and drawn color boxes.
- Slicing high-resolution image into several crops : A first tip to handle high-resolution images and a LLM decoder is to revise the management of a high-resolution input images into several low-resolution images, which are embedded in parallel by low-resolution visual encoders, and then aggregated to get through the LLM decoder.
    - SPHINX \cite{sphinx} first crops the the high-resolution document into four sub-images of 224x224, and adds to the slices the entire image representation in low-resolution. These 4 slices and the entire image are then encoded separately (using the 4 visual encoders CLIP-ViT, CLIP-ConvNeXt, DINIv2-ViT and BLIP2 visual encoder) and then concatenated as a long sequence for feeding into LLM.
    - UReader \cite{ureader} then developed an adaptive image cropping module upstream of the MLLM to take advantage of the frozen low-resolution pretrained visual encoder for processing high-resolution images. It is an adaptive image cropping module to divide a high-resolution image into several local images. This cropping module is adapted to each image: it predefines grids $\{g = (n_h \times n_w) \mid n_h \cdot n_w \leq N_c, n_h \in \mathbb{N}, n_w \in \mathbb{N}\}$ with various shapes, where $n_h$ and $n_w$ denote the number of rows and columns of the grid $g$, respectively, and $N_c$ represents the maximum number of cells (sub-images). To select a suitable grid for an image $I$ with shape $H \times W$, they measure the resolution coherence and shape similarity between the image and each grid, calculating the resolution-related and resolution-agnostic intersection over union ($S_{rr}$ and $S_{ra}$) as follows:
    \begin{align}
        S_{rr}(I, g) &= \text{IoU} \left( (H, W), (n_h H_v, n_w W_v) \right) \\
        S_{ra}(I, g) &= \text{IoU} \left( \left(\frac{n_w H}{W}, n_w\right), (n_h, n_w) \right)
    \end{align}
    where IoU denotes the intersection over the union between two rectangles centered and aligned with each other. The matched grid is selected by maximizing the matching score:
    \begin{equation}
        g^* = \arg\max_g \left( S_{ra}(I, g) + S_{rr}(I, g) \right)
    \end{equation}
    where $g^*$ is the selected grid. Then, they resize the input image to $(n_h H_v, n_w W_v)$ and crop it to $n_h \cdot n_w$ local images. To maintain the global structure information of the image, they also resize the input image to $(H_v, W_v)$ as a global image. All images are then passed on to the visual encoder in parallel, and are then concatenated to be given to the decoder (LLM).
    - Monkey \cite{monkey} uses a more judicious image cropping, to avoid losing image context following this slicing of the original image. It uses a sliding window, inspired by Swin Transformers \cite{swinvit} to split the image into slices. TextMonkey \cite{textmonkey} further proposes shifted window attention and token resampler to consider the connections among those different slices. The Shifted Window Attention establishes connections between windows. Thus, unlike UReader \cite{ureader}, the representations of each piece of image by the model are not concatenated but directly linked in the ViT using the addition of this sliding attention layer.
    - mPLUG-DocOwl1.5 \cite{mplugdocowl1.5} uses the same adaptive image cropping upstream as UReader \cite{ureader}, but instead of using the cropping position encoding before concatenating the representations of the different images of the document, mPLUG-DocOwl1.5 \cite{mplugdocowl1.5} adds special textual tokens \(<row_x\_col_y>\) before the visual features of each cropped image, where x and y refer to the row and column index respectively. For the global image, the textual indicator token is \(<global\_img>\), which allows for a better overall representation of the overall image. However, mPLUG-DocOwl1.5 also modified the projection matrix to adapt it to the fact that it handles slices of the image. The projection matrix implemented by mPLUG-DocOwl 1.5 \cite{mplugdocowl1.5} is H-Reducer, which accumulates visual features from neighborhoods through convolution to maintain relative position relationships between slices of the image. It consists of a convolution layer, from left to right, following the order of the slices of the image in the sequence. 
    - LLaVA-UDH \cite{llava-uhd} also adds specific tokens to each image slice, which are here ',' for columns separations and '\textbackslash n' for rows separations between slices of the image. More importantly, LLaVA-UDH introduces a way to crop the image effectively through an image-modularization strategy to slice the image into crops of variable sizes. Given an image with resolution \((W_I, H_I)\) and a Vision Transformer (ViT) pretrained on resolution \((W_v, H_v)\), LLaVA-UHD first calculates the required number of slices to process the image: \(N = \lceil \frac{W_I \times H_I}{W_v \times H_v} \rceil\). Then, LLaVA-UHD selects the best partition from possible factorizations, splitting the high-resolution image into varied-sized slices. To do so, it factorizes \(N\) into \(m\) columns and \(n\) rows such that \(m \times n = N\) where \(m, n \in \mathbb{N}\). To choose the best partition, LLaVA-UHD introduces a score function to gauge the variation from ViT's standard pretraining configuration: \(S(W_I, H_I, W_v, H_v, m, n) = -\log \left(\frac{W_I \times n}{H_I \times m}\right) - \log \left(\frac{W_v}{H_v}\right)\), where a higher score \(S(\cdot)\) indicates less deviation and is thus preferred. LLaVA-UHD determines the optimal partition as: \((m^*, n^*) = \underset{(m,n) \in \bar{C}}{\mathrm{argmax}}\ S(W_I, H_I, W_v, H_v, m, n)\).
    - In the same idea, InternLM-XComposer2-4KHD \cite{internlmxcomposer24k} introduced a dynamic image partitioning approach, which takes an image $I$ with size $[h, w]$ and resizes and padds it to a new image $I'$ with size $[rh \times 336, rw \times 336]$. Then, it splits the $I'$ into $rh \times rw$ non-overlapped slices. So, each slice is a small image with 336×336 pixels. It has a maximum overall image resolution of 4K (3840x1600 pixels), which is more than the previous methods. InternLM-XComposer2-4KHD also adds a learnable newline '\textbackslash n' token at the end of each row of the image features. For global view of the image, it adds to these slices the overall image representation, resized to 336x336. 
    - TextHawk \cite{texthawk} employs the same adaptive image cropping module as UReader \cite{ureader}, but enhances its capability by incorporating a Scalable Positional Embedding module (SPE). This addition is critical for managing the variation in the number of slices produced by the cropping module. The SPE is designed to adaptively adjust the positional embeddings based on the number of image slices, which varies dynamically with each image. This ensures that positional information remains accurate and consistent, irrespective of the number of slices or sub-images. Such adaptability is crucial when dealing with a wide range of image types and sizes, as it maintains the positional context essential for downstream tasks like image-based document understanding. Each positional embedding, denoted by \(\mathbf{e}_i\), is a vector representing the spatial position of the slice within the image grid:
    \begin{equation}
        \mathbf{e}_i = s \frac{\tilde{\mathbf{e}}_i}{\|\tilde{\mathbf{e}}_i\|}, \quad (i \in \{0, 1\}) 
    \end{equation}
    where $\tilde{\mathbf{e}}_i$ represents learnable endpoint positional embeddings, and $s$ is a scaling factor, adjusted to maintain the norm across different amounts of slices. This configuration allows TextHawk to effectively interpolate positional embeddings using Spherical Linear Interpolation (Slerp), thus accommodating variations in image segmentation brought forth by the adaptive cropping module. 
- Reduction of the sequence length of the high-resolution Visual Encoder output: Another tip for using high-resolution images and LLMs is to use of projection layers that transform and reduce the size of the output sequence produced by the high-resolution visual encoder.
    - Conversion of the fine-grained Visual Encoder to smaller dimension throwing the embeddings to the frequency domain to reduce complexity for LLM handling: DocPedia \cite{docpedia} has implemented a technique to reduce the sequence length of the representation of high-resolution visual encoders via a transformation of the input image into the frequency domain (similar to a Fourier transformation). It takes inspiration from the Fourier transformation, by allowing separating high-level information, such as structure and contours of objects, which are essential for the semantic understanding of the image, from low-level information such as texture and noise. This separation facilitates the analysis and processing of visual data by highlighting important features while reducing noise and non-essential details. This is what \cite{frequencyvit} implements upstream of its ViT: it converts the image into the frequency domain, and gives this representation to the ViT. It can thus process images of higher resolution while keeping the representation sequence length small. This works via the retrieval of certain important information from the image using a technique called Discrete Cosine Transform (DCT). This technique allows breaking down the image into small pieces of 8x8 pixels, then measuring the amount of energy present in each piece. These measurements are called "DCT coefficients" and they give us information on how energy is distributed in the image. These measurements (image color channels: luminance, blue chrominance, and red chrominance) form a more concise representation of the image.
    - Implementation of sampler-based modules: Different sampler-based methods have been developed to effectively reduce the dimensionality of visual embeddings. The Perceiver Resampler (\cite{flamingo2021}, \cite{kosmos2.5}, \cite{monkey}) employs cross-attention to condense image tokens into a smaller, manageable set, retaining essential information regardless of the original image size. In contrast, the Q-Former (\cite{blip2}, \cite{minigpt4}) extracts a fixed number of output features from the visual encoder through a predefined set of learnable queries, enabling a significant size reduction that remains constant and independent of the image's resolution. Similarly, the Document-Former (\cite{instructdoc}), an advanced form of Q-Former, specifically targets the intricate visual-textual interplay found in document images, translating complex layouts into LLM-friendly representations. The Visual Abstractor (\cite{mplugowl}, \cite{llmdoc}, \cite{mplugpaperowl}, \cite{ureader}) distills visual embeddings into a few potent tokens, capturing the essence of visual content and possibly allowing for a more nuanced semantic understanding. Some sampler-based approaches go further in the length reduction of the visual embedding: the H-Reducer (\cite{mplugdocowl1.5}) combines convolutional approaches to diminish sequence length while preserving horizontal semantic coherence, making it particularly suited for text-heavy images. Lastly, the ReSA (ReSampling and ReArrangement) (\cite{texthawk}) module uses a two-step approach to drastically truncate visual feature length: initial resampling through cross-attention followed by token rearrangement and linear projection, potentially offering a more substantial reduction for complex visual inputs. Each method presents unique advantages, and the choice among them would hinge on the specific requirements of the task, such as the degree of reduction needed and the importance of maintaining semantic fidelity in the compressed representation.
    - Usage of a Visual Token Merging Method : TinyChart \cite{tinychart} implements a visual token merging method after the visual encoder and before the projection layer, which aims at merging visual features in order to get a smaller sequence length, and thus to be capable of using a LLM as decoder. Since Charts typically contain a large number of color blocks and blank spaces, where patches are visually similar, they merge the \(r\) most similar tokens pairs, which reduces the length of the vision feature sequence by \(r\) in each layer. To do so, they follow the token merging strategy of ToMe (\cite{vittokenmerging}), which measures the similarity between two tokens using the cosine distance between Keys from self-attention, by first deviding the vision tokens into two disjoint sets, and then, for each token in one set, finding the most similar tokens in the other sets (only the adjacent ones), drawing an edge between the two tokens, and finally merging the features of the two endpoints through average pooling. When individual image patches (tokens) are merged, the resulting token represents multiple input patches. This can impact the attention mechanism's calculations, as the merged token now has a different 'size' in terms of the number of original patches it contains. So the attention mechanism is modified to take into account the size of the tokens: \[A = \text{softmax}\left(\frac{QK^T}{\sqrt{d}} + \log s\right) \] Here, \(s\) is a row vector that contains the size of each token in terms of how many patches (or pieces of data) it represents. By adding \(\log s\) to the attention scores, it scales the attention scores in a way that proportionally reflects the actual amount of information each token carries. Logarithm of the size is used because the softmax function is exponential, and using the logarithm helps in scaling the values in a way that integrates well with the exponential nature of softmax.  This adjustment ensures that the influence of each token in the attention mechanism is proportional to the amount of input data it represents, thereby maintaining a more balanced and accurate attention distribution across the tokens.
- Dual encoding of the image: with low and high resolution : Another tip to handle high-resolution images and a LLM decoder is to have a dual visual encoding approach, as presented in Figure~\ref{fig:tip2}. Here, a separate encoding is done for high-resolution and low-resolution images. The LLM takes the low-resolution embedding as input and communicates with the high-resolution embedding either through a specific cross-attention module (\cite{cogagent}, \cite{mini-gemini}) or with a specific adapter fusioning the high and low resolution representations (\cite{llava-hr}).
    - Another TIP to leverage both text-rich and vision-rich models is through the use of dual-encoder methods. CogAgent \cite{cogagent} takes advantage of general large pretrained Vision-and-Language Models (VLMs) alongside high-resolution small Vision Transformers (ViTs) using such a dual approach. This is achieved through a dual architecture where the document image is resized to both high-resolution (1120×1120) and low-resolution (224×224) and processed by two distinct-sized image encoders in parallel. The low-resolution encoder is part of the pretrained large VLM, CogVLM \cite{cogvlm}, which comprises an EVA2-CLIP-E encoder augmented with an MLP adapter, and uses a pretrained LLM, Vicuna-7b, as the decoder. In parallel, a high-resolution cross-module handles the high-resolution input image with a smaller ViT and cross-attention layers. This VLM is frozen during training, and only the high-resolution cross-module is trained. This method is vision-rich thanks to the small ViT used : Indeed, smaller ViTs can process images of higher resolution, which results in longer input sequences due to an increased number of patches, more effectively than larger ViTs. This capability arises primarily due to the quadratic memory complexity of the self-attention mechanism used in Transformers, which is denoted as $O(n^2 \cdot d)$ where $n$ is the sequence length and $d$ is the dimensionality of features. Larger models with higher $d$ consume significantly more memory for processing the same sequence length, thus restricting their ability to handle longer sequences within the limits of available memory resources. Furthermore, smaller models are often more adaptable to memory optimizations such as precision reduction, which allows for processing longer sequences under the same hardware constraints. This makes smaller ViTs particularly suitable for higher resolution images that require dividing the image into a greater number of smaller patches.
    - Mini-Gemini \cite{mini-gemini} adopts the same approach as CogAgent but with a pretrained CNN as high-resolution visual encoder (ConvNeXt) and CLIP-pretrained ViT as low-resolution visual encoder. There are a few differences with CogAgent: here, the input given to the LLM is formed by both the low-resolution visual embeddings and the high-resolution visual embeddings through a “Patch Info Mining” module. The output “Mined Tokens” of this module is formed with cross-attention mechanism: the low-resolution visual embedding $X'_L$ serving as the query $Q \in \mathbb{R}^{N \times C}$, aiming to retrieve pertinent visual information from the high-resolution candidate pool (the high-resolution feature map $X'_H$ being designated as the key $K \in \mathbb{R}^{N \times M^2 \times C}$ and the value $V \in \mathbb{R}^{N \times M^2 \times C}$).
    - LLaVA-HR \cite{llava-hr} adopts a similar approach, with one pathway aiming to encode global information of low-resolution images while the other one serves to capture fine-grained semantics from the high-resolution image. However, in LLaVA-HR, these two pathways are closely interacted via a novel mixture-of-resolution adapters (MR-Adapters), which embeds the high-resolution visual information into the low-resolution modeling (fusion layer), rather than just interracting with it with cross-attention.

- Dual network: fine-grained encoder with tiny decoder and low-resolution encoder with LLM: This is what Vary \cite{vary} does. Vary consists of two distinct components: a "vision vocabulary network," which features a high-resolution visual encoder (Pretrained ViTDet (\cite{vitdet})) and a tiny decoder (OPT-125M), and a classical MLLM that includes a low-resolution visual encoder (CLIP) and a Large Language Model as the decoder (Vicuna-7b). The fine-grained encoder with the tiny-decoder is trained autoregressively, focusing on next-token prediction, which enhances the high-resolution visual embedding. This embedding is then added to the frozen encoder of the MLLM, a process Vary refers to as "vocabulary expansion". With this method, Vary aims to ensure its enhancements to CLIP do not introduce noise when processing natural images, thereby effectively expanding the model's capabilities in fine-grained perception tasks.
- Get a multi-level Vision Encoder features, starting from high resolution towards a lower one : Another tip for using high-resolution image and a LLM as decoder is to incorporate multi-level visual encoders alongside multi-level attention mechanisms. Such an encoder operate by analyzing the image at various resolutions or levels, each capturing different scales of detail. Multi-level encoders reduce complexity by processing images in a hierarchical manner, analyzing details at progressively higher resolutions. Initially focusing on broad features at lower resolutions, these encoders merge smaller patches into larger, more abstract representations as they ascend the hierarchy. This avoids the computational burden of computing the attention of very high-resolution embeddings (because the embedding size decreases over the layers). By directing attention across intermediate encodings and selectively merging patches to represent richer features, the MLCA approach decreases computation complexity. This method preserves essential image information and minimizes resource use.

{{< vision_rich >}}

## {{< posttitle >}}4. Models using fine-grained vision model and a small Language Model as decoder{{< /posttitle >}}

{{< visionrich_small_dec >}}

